

Another post in the series "I'm learning Jekyll and teaching it to you, too".

A good way to find relevant content from a blog is tags.
Each post has tags and you can see all the tags and their corresponding posts in a tag cloud.
I have built this website using Jekyll.
It doesn't have a built-in support for tag clouds but you can use jekyll-tagging plugin.
Unfortunately I'm deploying and hosting this site using Github pages so custom plugins are not supported for security reasons.
There are ways to go around this such as Github Actions or jekyll-deploy-action.
However, I didn't want to go this way. I want a simple tag cloud that looks like this

- tag1
  - Post1 that uses tag1
  - Post2 that uses tag1
- tag2
  - Post1 that uses tag2
  ...

There are many posts about how to build tag clouds and tag sites using Liquid.
They are quite neat. But many will rely on a way to actually generate the tagpages like
- https://you.github.io/tag/football
- https://you.github.io/tag/chess

Since those cannot be generated using Liquid (as far as I know) they have to be generated using a Python script that is ran in CI after each commit.
It's a good solution but not for me.

I think an easier way is either:
1. Generate a page `/tags/` that has a list of all tags and all posts in the tags
2. Generate a sidebar to the main page that has a list of all tags and all posts in the tags

I found this solution:

```liquid
{% for tag in site.tags %}
  <h3>{{ tag[0] }}</h3>
  <ul>
    {% for post in tag[1] %}
      <li><a href="{{ post.url }}">{{ post.title }}</a></li>
    {% endfor %}
  </ul>
{% endfor %}
```

The result can be found in [here](https://hyrtsi.github.io/tags/)