---
layout: post
title:  "Summary of 2023"
date:   2023-12-27 13:37:00 +0200
tags: programming career projects
author: Eljas Hyyrynen (hyrtsi)
---

2023 was a good year.
I shifted my focus away from my career for a while and got some satisfying results.
I started the year mildly depressed, doing the wrong things and being anxious.
I ended the year feeling like a winner.
Here's my summary.

---

# Programming and career

## Game projects

I'm still composing music for Twilight Ferry, an upcoming Finnish indie game that is based on the national epic of Finland, Kalevala.

I have an own secret game project.
I'm currently using my own game engine and writing the lore.
It's a scifi RPG that tells about an engineer in a planet inhabitated by humans and cyborgs.

## Working with Automotive AR

I worked this year at Basemark. It's my second year there!
I still think it's a good company and I feel optimistic about it.
I've learned a ton - mostly c++ but also other skills.

## Open source

I got [my first PR](https://github.com/ultralytics/yolov5/pull/11171) merged to an open source project.
And it's not any project - it's yolov5. One of the most famous object detector in the world.

# Outside tech

## Lindy hop

Lindy hop is a swing dance with Afro-American roots.
It is to dance what jazz is to music: improvisatory, playful, syncopated, discussing between the dancers.
I've noticed a huge boost in my mood after I started dancing 1-5 days a week.

## Music

I had three classical guitar recitals this summer.
I'm preparing another set of concerts next year.
I took Tuvan throat singing lessons.

## Travelling

I travelled to 6 countries this year:
- A rock climbing trip to Italy in May
- Cycling in Sweden and Norway in the midsummer
- Cycling from Gibraltar to Dakar via Morocco, Mauritania and Senegal.

In addition to this, I hiked a week in the Finnish Lapland in the fall.

I cycled 4500km (2800mi) abroad.
My old body that's seen way too much pixels on computer monitors is still capable of moving.
Take care of your health, reader.

## Language skills

I rehearsed Swedish in the aforementioned Scandinavian trip.
I didn't need much Italian in Italy - usually 5 words and a fair share of gestures are enough.
I use English as my working language so I get to practise that daily.
Finally, I learned some Arabic, Spanish, French and Wolof during my cycling tour in Africa.

I started learning Japanese using Duolingo.


## Literature

I've read a lot this year.
My favorite books:
- Southern Mail by Antoine de Saint-Exupery
- Metro 2033 by Dmitry Glukhovsky
- Endurance: Shackleton's Incredible Voyage by Alfred Lansing

# Retrospect

I made [these](https://hyrtsi.github.io/2023/01/15/summary-22-23.html#2023) loose goals for 2023 in the beginning of the year.
How did I do?
It looks like I got the most important things done.
However, I didn't study ML much.
I ended up crushing some goals that I never imagined I'd do.
Life took me to new places.
I travelled to Africa for the first time and it changed my life.
I actually studied photography, shaders, audio programming and gamedev.

---

# 2024

The next year will be a year of...

- Music: I will practise songs for a new recital
- Dancing: I'm going to study Lindy hop and solo jazz
- Programming: I have tons of projects I want to finish.
  - Audio programming: my own synth
  - Graphics programming: image editor
  - Game engine
  - Map editor
  - Lots of secret projects that I may or may not ever finish
- Open source: I want to contribute more. Got any ideas? DM me.
- Travelling to an unknown place
- Literature. Mostly fiction. I hate self help.
